---
permalink: pattern-matching-and-functional-composition.html
title: Pattern matching & functional composition
layout: post
desc: More functions! PartialFunctions, more Pattern Matching
---

This lesson covers:

* Functions (again)
** compose
** andThen
* PartialFunctions
** range and domain
** composition with orElse
* Pattern Matching
** extractor methods
* What is a case statement?

h3. Function Composition

Let's make two helpful functions:

<pre>
scala> def addUmm(x: String) = x + " umm"
addUmm: (x: String)String

scala>  def addAhem(x: String) = x + " ahem"
addAhem: (x: String)String
</pre>

h4. compose

compose calls the second function and then the first function.

compose is f(g(x))

<pre>
scala> val ummThenAhem = (addAhem _).compose(andUmm)
ummThenAhem: String => java.lang.String = <function1>

scala> ummThenAhem("well")
res0: String = well umm ahem
</pre>

h4. andThen

andThen calls the first function and then the second.

andThen is <code>g(f(x))</code>

<pre>
scala> val ahemThenUmm = (addAhem _).andThen(andUmm (_))
ahemThenUmm: String => java.lang.String = <function1>

scala> ahemThenUmm("well")
res1: String = well ahem umm
</pre>

h4. Currying vs Partial Application


h3. case statements

h5. So just what are case statements?

It's a subclass of function called a PartialFunction.

h5. What is a collection of multiple case statements?

They are multiple PartialFunctions composed together.


h3. Understanding PartialFunction

A function works for every argument of the defined type. In other words, a function defined as (Int) => String takes any Int and returns a String.

A Partial Function is only defined for certain values of the defined type.  A Partial Function (Int) => String might not accept every Int.

<code>isDefinedAt</code> is a method on PartialFunction that can be used to determine if the PartialFunction will accept a given argument.

__Note__ <code>PartialFunction</code> is unrelated to a partially applied function that we talked about earlier.

<pre>
scala> val one: PartialFunction[Int, String] = { case 1 => "one" }
one: PartialFunction[Int,String] = <function1>

scala> one.isDefinedAt(1)
res0: Boolean = true

scala> one.isDefinedAt(2)
res1: Boolean = false
</pre>

You can apply a partial function.

<pre>
scala> one(1)
res2: String = one
</pre>

PartialFunctions can be composed with something new, called orElse, that reflects whether the PartialFunction is defined over the supplied argument.

<pre>
scala> val two: PartialFunction[Int, String] = { case 2 => "two" }
two: PartialFunction[Int,String] = <function1>

scala> val three: PartialFunction[Int, String] = { case 3 => "three" }
three: PartialFunction[Int,String] = <function1>

scala> val wildcard: PartialFunction[Int, String] = { case _ => "something else" }
wildcard: PartialFunction[Int,String] = <function1>

scala> one orElse two orElse three orElse wildcard
res23: PartialFunction[Int,String] = <function1>

scala> res23(5)
res24: String = something else

scala> res23(3)
res25: String = three

scala> res23(2)
res26: String = two

scala> res23(1)
res27: String = one

scala> res23(0)
res28: String = something else
</pre>

h4. The mystery of case.

Last week we saw something curious. We saw a case statement used where a function is normally used.

<pre>
scala> case class PhoneExt(name: String, ext: Int)
defined class PhoneExt

scala> val extensions = List(PhoneExt("steve", 100), PhoneExt("robey", 200))
extensions: List[PhoneExt] = List(PhoneExt(steve,100), PhoneExt(robey,200))

scala> extensions.filter { case PhoneExt(name, extension) => extension < 200 }
res0: List[PhoneExt] = List(PhoneExt(steve,100))
</pre>

Why does this work?

filter takes a function. In this case a predicate function of (PhoneExt) => Boolean.

A PartialFunction is a subtype of Function so filter can also take a PartialFunction!
