---
permalink: coll2.html
title: More collections
layout: post
desc: Tour of the Scala Collections library
---

"This page":http://www.decodified.com/scala/collections-api.xml offers a great way to follow the default implementations and links to all the scaladoc.

h2. The basics

h4. List

The standard linked list.

<pre>
scala> List(1, 2, 3)
res0: List[Int] = List(1, 2, 3)
</pre>

You can cons them up as you would expect in a functional language.

<pre>
scala> 1 :: 2 :: 3 :: Nil
res1: List[Int] = List(1, 2, 3)
</pre>

h4. Set

Sets have no duplicates

<pre>
scala> Set(1, 1, 2)
res2: scala.collection.immutable.Set[Int] = Set(1, 2)
</pre>

h4. Seq

Sequences have a defined order.

<pre>
scala> Seq(1, 1, 2)
res3: Seq[Int] = List(1, 1, 2)
</pre>

h4. Map

Maps are key value containers.

<pre>
scala> Map('a' -> 1, 'b' -> 2)
res4: scala.collection.immutable.Map[Char,Int] = Map((a,1), (b,2))
</pre>

h2. The Hierarchy

These are all traits, both the mutable and immutable packages have implementations of these as well as specialized implementations.

h3. Traversable

All collections can be traversed.  This trait you the standard function combinators written in terms of a foreach that you implement @foreach@.

h3. Iterable

Has an @iterator()@ method to give you an Iterator over the elements.

h3. Seq

Sequence of items with ordering.

h3. Set

A collection of items with no duplicates.

h3. Map

Key Value Pairs.

h2. The methods

h3. Traversable

All of these methods below are available all the way down.  The argument and return types types won't always look the same as subclasses are free to override them.

<pre>
def head : A
def tail : Traversable[A]
</pre>

Here are where the Fuctional Combinators are defined.

<pre>
def map [B] (f: (A) => B) : CC[B]
</pre>

returns a collection with every element transformed by @f@

<pre>
def foreach[U](f: Elem => U): Unit
</pre>

mutates a collection by executing @f@ over each element.

<pre>
def find (p: (A) => Boolean) : Option[A]
</pre>

returns the first element that matches the predicate funciton

<pre>
def filter (p: (A) => Boolean) : Traversable[A]
</pre>

returns a collection with all elements matching the predicate function

Partitioning:

<pre>
def partition (p: (A) ⇒ Boolean) : (Traversable[A], Traversable[A])
</pre>

Splits a collection into two halves based on a predicate function

<pre>
def groupBy [K] (f: (A) => K) : Map[K, Traversable[A]]
</pre>

Conversion:

Interestingly, you can convert one collection type to another.

<pre>
def toArray : Array[A]
def toArray [B >: A] (implicit arg0: ClassManifest[B]) : Array[B]
def toBuffer [B >: A] : Buffer[B]
def toIndexedSeq [B >: A] : IndexedSeq[B]
def toIterable : Iterable[A]
def toIterator : Iterator[A]
def toList : List[A]
def toMap [T, U] (implicit ev: <:<[A, (T, U)]) : Map[T, U]
def toSeq : Seq[A]
def toSet [B >: A] : Set[B]
def toStream : Stream[A]
def toString () : String
def toTraversable : Traversable[A]
</pre>

Let's convert a Map to an Array. What you get is an Array of the Key Value pairs.

<pre>
scala> Map(1 -> 2).toArray
res41: Array[(Int, Int)] = Array((1,2))
</pre>

h3. Iterable

Adds access to an iterator.

<pre>
def iterator: Iterator[A]
</pre>

What does an Iterator give you?

<pre>
def hasNext(): Boolean
def next(): A
</pre>

This is very Java-esque.  You often won't see iterators used in Scala, you are much more likely to see the functional combinators or a for-comprehension used.

h3. Set

<pre>
def contains(key: A): Boolean
def +(elem: A): Set[A]
def -(elem: A): Set[A]
</pre>

h5. Map

Sequence of key and value pairs with lookup by key.

Pass a List of Pairs into apply() like so

<pre>
scala> Map("a" -> 1, "b" -> 2)
res0: scala.collection.immutable.Map[java.lang.String,Int] = Map((a,1), (b,2))
</pre>

Or also like:

<pre>
scala> Map(("a", 2), ("b", 2))
res0: scala.collection.immutable.Map[java.lang.String,Int] = Map((a,2), (b,2))
</pre>

h6. Digression

What is <code>-></code>? That isn't special syntax, it's a method that returns a Tuple.

<pre>
scala> "a" -> 2
res0: (java.lang.String, Int) = (a,2)
</pre>

Remember, that is just sugar for

<pre>
scala> "a".->(2)
res1: (java.lang.String, Int) = (a,2)
</pre>

You can also build one up via <code>++</code>

<pre>
scala> Map.empty ++ List(("a", 1), ("b", 2), ("c", 3))
res0: scala.collection.immutable.Map[java.lang.String,Int] = Map((a,1), (b,2), (c,3))
</pre>

h3. Commonly used subclasses

h4. HashSet and HashMap

Quick lookup, the most commonly used forms of these collections.

h5. TreeMap

A subclass of SortedMap, it gives you ordered access.


h5. Vector

Fast random selection and fast updates.

<pre>
scala> IndexedSeq(1, 2, 3)
res0: IndexedSeq[Int] = Vector(1, 2, 3)
</pre>


h4. Range

Ordered sequence of Ints that are spaced apart.  You will often see this used where a counting for-loop was used before.

<pre>
scala> for (i <- 1 to 10) { println(i) }
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
</pre>

Ranges have the standard functional combinators available to them.

<pre>
scala> (1 to 10).map { i => i }
res0: scala.collection.immutable.IndexedSeq[Int] = Vector(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10)
</pre>

h3. Defaults

Using apply methods on the traits will give you an instance of the default implementation, For instance, Iterable(1, 2) returns a List as it's default implementation.

<pre>
scala> Iterable(1, 2)
res0: Iterable[Int] = List(1, 2)
</pre>

Same with Seq

<pre>
scala> Seq(1, 2)
res3: Seq[Int] = List(1, 2)

scala> Iterable(1, 2)
res1: Iterable[Int] = List(1, 2)

scala> Sequence(1, 2)
warning: there were deprecation warnings; re-run with -deprecation for details
res2: Seq[Int] = List(1, 2)
</pre>

Set

<pre>
scala> Set(1, 2)
res31: scala.collection.immutable.Set[Int] = Set(1, 2)
</pre>

h4. IndexedSeq

fast random-access of elements and a fast length operation.

h4. LinearSeq

fast access only to the first element via head, but also has a fast tail operation.

h4. Mutable vs. Immutable

immutable

Pros
* Can't change in multiple threads

Con
* Can't change at all

Scala allows us to be pragmatic, it encourages immutability but does not penalize us for needing mutatability.  This is very similar to var vs.  val.  We always start with val and move back to var when required.

We favor starting with the immutable versions of collections but switching to the mutable ones if performance dictates.  Using immutable collections means you won't accidentally change things in multiple threads.


h2. Mutable

All of the above classes we've discussed were immutable.  Let's discuss the commonly used mutable collections.

h3. HashMap

getOrElseUpdate
+=

<pre>
scala> val numbers = collection.mutable.Map(1 -> 2)
numbers: scala.collection.mutable.Map[Int,Int] = Map((1,2))

scala> numbers.get(1)
res0: Option[Int] = Some(2)

scala> numbers.getOrElseUpdate(2, 3)
res54: Int = 3

scala> numbers
res55: scala.collection.mutable.Map[Int,Int] = Map((2,3), (1,2))

scala> numbers += (4 -> 1)
res56: numbers.type = Map((2,3), (4,1), (1,2))
</pre>

h3. ListBuffer and ArrayBuffer

+=

h3. LinkedList and DoublyLinkedList

h3. PriorityQueue

h3. Stack and ArrayStack


h3. StringBuilder

Interestingly, StringBuilder is a collection.



h2. Life with Java

You can easily move between Java and Scala collection types using a set of implicit conversions that are available in the JavaConversions package.

<pre>
import scala.collection.JavaConversions._
val sl = new scala.collection.mutable.ListBuffer[Int]
val jl : java.util.List[Int] = sl
val sl2 : scala.collection.mutable.Buffer[Int] = jl
assert(sl eq sl2)
</pre>

Two way conversions:

<pre>
scala.collection.Iterable <=> java.lang.Iterable
scala.collection.Iterable <=> java.util.Collection
scala.collection.Iterator <=> java.util.{ Iterator, Enumeration }
scala.collection.mutable.Buffer <=> java.util.List
scala.collection.mutable.Set <=> java.util.Set
scala.collection.mutable.Map <=> java.util.{ Map, Dictionary }
scala.collection.mutable.ConcurrentMap <=> java.util.concurrent.ConcurrentMap
</pre>

In addition, the following one way conversions are provided:

<pre>
scala.collection.Seq => java.util.List
scala.collection.mutable.Seq => java.util.List
scala.collection.Set => java.util.Set
scala.collection.Map => java.util.Map
</pre>
