---
permalink: basics.html
title: Basics
layout: post
desc: Values, functions, classes, methods, inheritance, try-catch-finally. Expression-oriented programming
---

This lesson covers:
* "About this class":#overview
* "expressions":#expressions
* "values":#val
* "functions":#functions
* "classes":#class
* "basic inheritance":#extends
* "traits":#trait
* "types":#types

h2(#overview). About this class

The first few weeks will cover basic syntax and concepts.  Then we'll start to open it up with more exercises.

Some examples will be given as if written in the interpreter, others as if written in a source file.

Having an interpreter available makes it easy to explore a problem space.


h3. Why Scala?

* Expressive
** First-class functions
** Closures
* Concise
** Type inference
** Literal syntax for function creation
* Java interoperability
** Can reuse java libraries
** Can reuse java tools
** No performance penalty

h3. How Scala?

* Compiles to java bytecode
* Works with any standard JVM
** Or even some non-standard JVMs like Dalvik
** Scala compiler written by author of Java compiler

h3. Think Scala

Scala is not just a nicer Java.  You should learn it with a fresh mind, you will get more out of these classes.

h3. Start the Interpreter

Start the included <code>sbt console</code>.

<pre>
$ sbt console

[...]

Welcome to Scala version 2.8.0.final (Java HotSpot(TM) 64-Bit Server VM, Java 1.6.0_20).
Type in expressions to have them evaluated.
Type :help for more information.

scala>
</pre>


h2(#expressions). Expressions

<pre>
scala> 1 + 1
res0: Int = 2
</pre>

res0 is an automatically created value name given by the interpreter to the result of your expression.  It has the type Int and contains the Integer 2.

(Almost) everything in Scala is an expression.

h2(#val). Values

You can give the result of an expression a name.

<pre>
scala> val two = 1 + 1
two: Int = 2
</pre>

You cannot change the binding to a val.

h3. Variables

If you need to change the binding, you can use a <code>var</code> instead

<pre>
scala> var name = "steve"
name: java.lang.String = steve

scala> name = "marius"
name: java.lang.String = marius
</pre>

h2(#functions). Functions

You can create functions with def.

<pre>
scala> def addOne(m: Int): Int = m + 1
addOne: (m: Int)Int
</pre>

In Scala, you need to specify the type signature for function parameters.  The interpreter happily repeats the type signature back to you.

<pre>
scala> val three = addOne(2)
three: Int = 3
</pre>

You can leave off parens on functions with no arguments

<pre>
scala> def three() = 1 + 2
three: ()Int

scala> three()
res2: Int = 3

scala> three
res3: Int = 3
</pre>

h3. Anonymous Functions

You can create anonymous functions.

<pre>
scala> (x: Int) => x + 1
res2: (Int) => Int = <function1>
</pre>

This function adds 1 to an Int named x.

<pre>
scala> res2(1)
res3: Int = 2
</pre>

You can pass anonymous functions around or save them into vals.

<pre>
scala> val addOne = (x: Int) => x + 1
addOne: (Int) => Int = <function1>

scala> addOne(1)
res4: Int = 2
</pre>

If your function is made up of many expressions, you can use {} to give yourself some breathing room.

<pre>
def timesTwo(i: Int): Int = {
  println("hello world")
  i * 2
}
</pre>

This is also true of an anonymous function

<pre>
scala> { i: Int =>
  println("hello world")
  i * 2
}
res0: (Int) => Int = <function1>
</pre>

You will see this syntax often used when passing an anonymous function as an argument.

h3. Partial application

You can partially apply a function with an underscore, which gives you another function.

<pre>
scala> def adder(m: Int, n: Int) = m + n
adder: (m: Int,n: Int)Int
</pre>

<pre>
scala> val add2 = adder(2, _:Int)
add2: (Int) => Int = <function1>

scala> add2(3)
res50: Int = 5
</pre>

You can partially apply any argument in the argument list, not just the last one.

h3. Curried functions

Sometimes it makes sense to let people apply some arguments to your function now and others later.

Here's an example of a function that lets you build multipliers of two numbers together. At one call site, you'll decide which is the multiplier and at a later call site, you'll choose a multipicand.

<pre>
scala> def multiply(m: Int)(n: Int): Int = m * n
multiply: (m: Int)(n: Int)Int
</pre>

You can call it directly with both arguments.

<pre>
scala> multiply(2)(3)
res0: Int = 6
</pre>

You can fill in the first parameter and partially apply the second.

<pre>
scala> val timesTwo = multiply(2) _
timesTwo: (Int) => Int = <function1>

scala> timesTwo(3)
res1: Int = 6
</pre>

You can take any function of multiple arguments and curry it. Let's try with our earlier <code>adder</code>

<pre>
scala> (adder _).curried
res1: (Int) => (Int) => Int = <function1>
</pre>

h3. Variable length arguments

There is a special syntax for methods that can take parameters of a repeated type.

<pre>
def capitalizeAll(args: String*) = {
  args.map { arg =>
    arg.capitalize
  }
}
</pre>

h2(#class). Classes

<pre>
scala> class Calculator {
     |   val brand: String = "HP"
     |   def add(m: Int, n: Int): Int = m + n
     | }
defined class Calculator

scala> val calc = new Calculator
calc: Calculator = Calculator@e75a11

scala> calc.add(1, 2)
res1: Int = 3

scala> calc.brand
res2: String = "HP"
</pre>

Contained are examples are defining methods with def and fields with val.  methods are just functions that can access the state of the class.

h3. Constructor

Constructors aren't special methods, they are the code outside of method definitions in your class.  Let's extend our Calculator example to take a constructor argument and use it to initialize internal state.

<pre>
class Calculator(brand: String) {
  /**
   * A constructor.
   */
  val color: String = if (brand == "TI") {
    "blue"
  } else if (brand == "HP") {
    "black"
  } else {
    "white"
  }

  // An instance method.
  def add(m: Int, n: Int): Int = m + n
}
</pre>

Note the two different styles of comments.

h3. Expressions

Our BasicCalculator example gave an example of how Scala is expression-oriented.  The value color was bound based on an if/else expression. Scala is highly expression-oriented: most things are expressions rather than statements.

h2(#extends). Inheritance

<pre>
class ScientificCalculator(brand: String) extends Calculator(brand) {
  def log(m: Double, base: Double) = math.log(m) / math.log(base)
}
</pre>

*See Also* Effective Scala points out that a <a href="http://twitter.github.com/effectivescala/#Types%20and%20Generics-Type%20aliases">Type alias</a> is better than <code>extends</code> if the subclass isn't actually different from the superclass. A Tour of Scala describes <a href="http://www.scala-lang.org/node/125">Subclassing</a>.


h3. Overloading methods

<pre>
class EvenMoreScientificCalculator(brand: String) extends ScientificCalculator(brand) {
  def log(m: Int): Double = log(m, math.exp(1))
}
</pre>


h2(#trait). Traits

<code>traits</code> are collections of fields and behaviors that you can extend or mixin to your classes.

<pre>
trait Car {
  val brand: String
}
</pre>

<pre>
class BMW extends Car {
  val brand = "BMW"
}
</pre>

*See Also* Effective Scala has opinions about <a href="http://twitter.github.com/effectivescala/#Object oriented programming-Traits">trait</a>.

h2(#types). Types

Earlier, you saw that we defined a function that took an <code>Int</code> which is a type of Number. Functions can also be generic and work on any type. When that occurs, you'll see a type parameter introduced with the square bracket syntax. Here's an example of a Cache of generic Keys and Values.

<pre>
trait Cache[K, V] {
  def get(key: K): V
  def put(key: K, value: V)
  def delete(key: K)
}
</pre>

Methods can also have type parameters introduced.

<pre>
def remove[K](key: K)
</pre>
